Algebra is a part of mathematics (often called math in the United States and maths in the United Kingdom[1] ). It uses variables to represent a value that is not yet known. When an equals sign (=) is used, this is called an equation. A very simple equation using a variable is: 2 + 3 = x In this example, x = 5, or it could also be said, "x equals five". This is called solving for x. [2]

Besides equations, there are inequalities (less than and greater than). A special type of equation is called the function. This is often used in making graphs.

Algebra can be used to solve real problems because the rules of algebra work in real life and numbers can be used to represent the values of real things. Physics, engineering and computer programming are areas that use algebra all the time. It is also useful to know in surveying, construction and business, especially accounting.

People who do algebra need to know the rules of numbers and mathematic operations used on numbers, starting with adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing. More advanced operations involve exponents, starting with squares and square roots. Many of these rules can also be used on the variables, and this is where it starts to get interesting.

Algebra was first used to solve equations and inequalities. Two examples are linear equations (the equation of a line, y=mx+b) and quadratic equations, which has variables that are squared (power of two, a number that is multiplied by itself, for example: 2*2, 3*3, x*x). How to factor polynomials is needed for quadratic equations.

History[change | change source]
Early forms of algebra were developed by the Babylonians and the Greeks. However the word "algebra" is a Latin form of the Arabic word Al-Jabr ("casting") and comes from a mathematics book Al-Maqala fi Hisab-al Jabr wa-al-Muqabilah, ("Essay on the Computation of Casting and Equation") written in the 9th century by a Persian mathematician, Muhammad ibn M큰s훮 al-Khw훮rizm카, who was a Muslim born in Khwarizm in Uzbekistan. He flourished under Al-Ma'moun in Baghdad, Iraq through 813-833 AD, and died around 840 AD. The book was brought into Europe and translated into Latin in the 12th century. The book was then given the name 'Algebra'. (The ending of the mathematician's name, al-Khwarizmi, was changed into a word easier to say in Latin, and became the English word algorithm).[3]

Examples[change | change source]
Here is a simple example of an algebra problem:

Sue has 12 candies, Ann has 24
candies. They decide to share so that they have the same number of candies.
These are the steps you can use to solve the problem:

To have the same number of candies, Ann has to give some to Sue. Let x represent the number of candies Ann gives to Sue.
Sue's candies, plus x, must be the same as Ann's candies minus x. This is written as: 12 + x = 24 - x
Subtract 12 from both sides of the equation. This gives: x = 12 - x. (What happens on one side of the equals sign must happen on the other side too, for the equation to still be true. So in this case when 12 was subtracted from both sides, there was a middle step of 12 + x - 12 = 24 - x - 12. After a person is comfortable with this, the middle step is not written down.)
Add x to both sides of the equation. This gives: 2x = 12
Divide both sides of the equation by 2. This gives x = 6. The answer is six. If Ann gives Sue 6 candies, they will have the same number of candies.
To check this, put 6 back into the original equation wherever x was: 12 + 6 = 24 - 6
This gives 18=18, which is true. They both now have 18 candies.
With practice, algebra can be used when faced with a problem that is too hard to solve any other way. Problems such as building a freeway, designing a cell phone, or finding the cure for a disease all require algebra.